#Code Book

##About Raw Data
The raw data were obtained from the UCI Machine Learning repository. The data were drawn from the *Human Activity Recognition Using Samrtphoes Data Set*.  The data were downloaded from https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip 

For detailed descriptions of the original data set, please see features_info.txt contained within the UCI HAR Dataset directory.

The raw data contains measurements from 30 volunteers between the ages of 19-48 years.  Each individual performed six activities (walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing, laying) while wearing a Samsung Galaxy S II smartphone on their waist. Using the phone's embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity measures were captured at a constant rate of 50Hz. The data from 70% of the participants was selected to be the training data set, with the data from the remaining 30% of the participants selected to be the test data. 

###Signals
The 3-axial time domain signals from the smartphone's accelerometer and gyroscope were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz and subsequently filtered to remove noise. The acceleration signal was separated into body and gravity acceleration signals using another filter. Measures of body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals. The magnitude of these signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm. A Fast Fourier Transform was applied to some of these time domain signals to obtain frequency domain signals.

The full set of variables estimated from the signals are listed din the features.txt file.  For my purpose, the mean value of each measurement, as well as the standard deviation for each measurement were estimated and stored in variables labeled with `mean()` and `std()`, respectively.  No units were reported, as all features were normalized and bounded between [-1,1].

##Data Transformations
The raw data sets were processed with the run_analysis.R script to create the tidy data set tidy_data_means.txt.

1. Combining training and test sets
The training and test data (X_train.txt and X_test.txt), subject IDs (subject_train.txt and subject_test.txt), and activity labels (y_train.txt and y_test.txt) were merged to obtain a single data set, `all_data`. The columns were labelled using the names contained in the file features.txt.

2. Mean and standard deviations variables
From the `all_data` data set, a subset of the data containing only the variables that were the mean and standard deviations of the original measurements.  This subset (`subset_data`) was generated by selecting columns that contained the string `mean()` and `std()`, with `fixed = TRUE` to exclude `meanFreq()` columns
and `ignore.case = FALSE` to exclude columns with `Mean` in the name. The original variable nams were converted to names that would be valid in R using the `make.names` function.

3. Descriptive activity names
A new variable, `Act_Labels` was added to `subset_data`, which contained a description of the activities instead of the numbers 1 through 6. This variable was created by making the original numbered activities variable into a factor and assigning it the labels in the file activity_labels.txt.

4. Label variables appropriately
Although the `make.names` function converted the original, invalid variable names into valid names for use in R by removing the parentheses, dashes, and commas, the variable names were further edited for clarity.  Trailing points (e.g., `.mean...`) were removed and the labels `mean` and `std` were relabelled as `Mean` and `Sd`, respectively, so that the names were in camelCase.  Lastly, labels containing a duplicate `Body` label were corrected.  These corrections were made using the `gsub` function.

5. Tidy data set
A final tidy data set (`subset_averages`) was created from `subset_data` using ddply.  The `subset_averages` contains 180 rows and 69 columns.  Each row represent the average values for each activity for each participant.  The columns contain the variables that were mean or standard deviation values, along with the subject ID (`Subject`), the numerical activity ID (`Activity`), and the descriptive activity ID (`Act_Labels`).

Variables beginning with the letter 't' are time domain variables, while those beginning with the letter 'f' are frequency domain variables. Variables containing 'Body' and 'Gravity' refer to measurements of the body and gravity acceleration signals respectively. Variable names contain the abreviations 'Acc' and 'Gyro', which refer to the signal type: 'Accelerometer' and 'Gyroscope', respectively. The magnitude measures are indicated with the label 'Mag'. Where applicable, the measures represent signals from the X, Y, or Z axes.